---
layout: page
title: Cases and Technical Notes
---

## Cases

**C7. Reliance Communications: On the Brink of Bankruptcy** (with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/)): [Case no.
F&A0560](https://cases.iima.ac.in/index.php/reliance-communications-on-the-brink-of-bankruptcy.html).  

This case describes the change in fortune of Reliance Communications (RCom) from
being a pioneer in offering low-cost mobile telephony to the brink of
bankruptcy. After giving a brief background on the family history of Reliance
Industries, its break-up and the launch of RCom, it describes the changing
dynamics of the Indian telecommunications industry after the launch of Reliance
Jio and the difficulties faced by RCom. As RCom's debt troubles increased, while
its stock price and its credit rating plunged, yields on its Indian Rupee bonds
barely moved. The case allows for discussing ways of implementing capital
structure arbitrage in such situations and analyze issues that arise in doing
so. The case provides data on yields on RCom's Indian Rupee and US dollar bonds
over time and provides additional relevant financial information about RCom,
including its market share, stock price, credit rating and balance sheet
variables. The case would be appropriate for use in an advanced corporate
finance or a strategic risk management or a trading strategies course.  

**C2. Asset Pricing**: This PhD course introduces the theory of financial
economics and the language of modern asset pricing in discrete time. The course
adopts the state price and stochastic discount factor approaches to asset
pricing based on expected utility theory. Within this framework, the course
covers the classical mean variance models including the CAPM and APT as well as
the inter-temporal consumption based asset pricing model. The entire course is
based on a discrete time and mostly discrete state space setting, with a focus
on equity markets. The course ends with a survey of stylized facts and issues in
empirical asset pricing.

**C1. Financial Markets**: This MBA course introduces finance theory and
describes economics of bond, equity, FX and derivatives markets. This compulsory
course forms the foundation for all subsequent finance courses. I regularly
teach this course in our on-campus long duration and online/blended learning
programs.

## E. Current elective courses (in descending order of their offering)

**E5. Black Swans and Gray Rhinos**: Made popular by Nicholas Nassim Taleb,
"black swans" has long been used as a metaphor in financial markets for rare and
almost impossible-to-predict large shocks. Noticing that often many crisis are a
result of ignoring the obvious, Michel Wucker coined the "gray rhinos" metaphor
to capture that many large problems are often well in sight but not identified
as one at the time (rhinos are often described as either black or white, but
they are all really gray). The purpose of this MBA elective is to understand the
variety of black swan and gray rhino events leading up to financial crises
through the lens of historical episodes and study the strategic issues that
arise in navigating them through different business situations. The cases
covered in the course discuss the impact of different kinds of crises on
acquisitions, debt restructuring, financial flexibility and portfolio management
decisions. This course is offered with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}.
