---
layout: page
title: Teaching
---

### Current core courses

**C3. Corporate Finance**: This MBA course covers the principal decisions in
corporate finance -- working capital management, investment and financing
decisions, mergers and acquisitions, capital structure, dividend policy and risk
management. I regularly teach this course in our on-campus long duration and
online/blended learning programs.

**C2. Asset Pricing**: This PhD course introduces the theory of financial
economics and the language of modern asset pricing in discrete time. The course
adopts the state price and stochastic discount factor approaches to asset
pricing based on expected utility theory. Within this framework, the course
covers the classical mean variance models including the CAPM and APT as well as
the inter-temporal consumption based asset pricing model. The entire course is
based on a discrete time and mostly discrete state space setting, with a focus
on equity markets. The course ends with a survey of stylized facts and issues in
empirical asset pricing.

**C1. Financial Markets**: This MBA course introduces finance theory and
describes economics of bond, equity, FX and derivatives markets. This compulsory
course forms the foundation for all subsequent finance courses. I regularly
teach this course in our on-campus long duration and online/blended learning
programs.

### Current elective courses

**E6. International Financial Markets**: This MBA course is designed to
introduce the students to practicalities and language of international financial
markets, including equity, bonds, oil and foreign exchange markets. The course
builds on the basics developed in the foundation finance courses of the MBA
program at IIMA (or equivalent) and studies their application from the point of
view of investments and financing in international financial markets. The topics
covered include i) international equity markets and portfolio diversification,
ii) international bond financing, iii) international crude oil markets, and iv)
foreign exchange markets and currency derivatives. This is a new course with its
first offering in the coming academic year in 2023.

**E5. Economics of Financial Crises**: This PhD course is designed to introduce
the students to select literature on the economics of financial crisis. Given
the breadth of research on the subject, a short course like this has to make a
choice between surveying all major strands of the relevant literature or
choosing to focus on a few of them. This course takes the latter view and
restricts the scope of the couse to discussing influential theoretical papers on
i) bank runs and liquidity crises, and ii) the economics of securitization,
funding liquidity and credit freezes, particularly in the context of the Global
Financial Crisis of 2008. This is a new course with its first offering in the
coming academic year in 2023.

**E4. Foundations of Finance**: This MBA course is designed to introduce the
theoretical foundations underlying some of the main conceptual ideas introduced
in basic finance courses of MBA programs. The course is designed for students
interested in understanding the economic foundations of finance, the elements
which are usually skipped in introductory finance courses, and/or looking to
recap main ideas in finance with some added depth. In particular, the course
covers the microeconomics of risk and risk aversion, origins of the Capital
Asset Pricing Model, classical theories underlying capital structure and
dividend policy, and risk management. This course was started in 2022. 

**E3. Strategic Corporate Finance**: This MBA course is designed to introduce
strategic corporate finance issues that Chief Financial Officers have to deal
with in a variety of corporations ranging from mature organizations to newly
listed firms to unicorns. Building upon the basics covered in the core PGPX
corporate finance course, this elective brings to fore the role of the CFO in
dealing with complex situations like managing portfolios of businesses and
strategic acquisitions, arranging financing from capital providers, dealing and
communicating with different stakeholders, including the Board of Directors and
large investors, and setting policies to ward off against volatile financial and
business environments as well as corporate governance crises. The emphasis would
be on discussing situations where decision making requires both the CFO and the
CEO to work closely together to ensure coherence between financial and business
strategy. This course is with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"} and was started in 2022.

**E2. Black Swans and Gray Rhinos**: Made popular by Nicholas Nassim Taleb,
"black swans" has long been used as a metaphor in financial markets for rare and
almost impossible-to-predict large shocks. Noticing that often many crisis are a
result of ignoring the obvious, Michel Wucker coined the "gray rhinos" metaphor
to capture that many large problems are often well in sight but not identified
as one at the time (rhinos are often described as either black or white, but
they are all really gray). The purpose of this MBA elective is to understand the
variety of black swan and gray rhino events leading up to financial crises
through the lens of historical episodes and study the strategic issues that
arise in navigating them through different business situations. The cases
covered in the course discuss the impact of different kinds of crises on
acquisitions, debt restructuring, financial flexibility and portfolio management
decisions. This course is with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}, and regularly offered
since 2020.

**E1. Fixed Income Securities**: This MBA elective is designed to provide
theoretical and practical understanding of fixed income securities, credit risk,
and securitization both from the perspective of an investment manager or
financial intermediary and from the perspective of an issuer of these
securities. There is only very minimal coverage of fixed income derivatives and
credit derivatives. This course is with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}, and regularly offered
since 2014.

### Old or one-off courses, in descending order of their last offering

**O12. Financial Risk Management**: This MBA course was designed to study the
role and elements of risk management in financial institutions. After studying
the environment in which commercial banks, investment firms and hedge funds
operate in, and the need for a dedicated risk management function in large
financial institutions, the course separately discussed the practical and
regulatory issues that arise in managing different kinds of risks, in
particular, market risk, credit risk, model risk and operational risk. The focus
was on the organization of the risk management function and the evolving
regulatory landscape after the global financial crisis. The was a one-off course
offered jointly with Saee Joshi (a PGP alumnus) in 2022.

**O11. Seminar Course in Derivatives Markets**: This PhD course was designed to
introduce literature on markets for exchange-traded derivatives and economics of
derivatives clearing. Beginning with a recap of basics of derivatives and
introduction to the economics of no-arbitrage and the Black-Scholes model, the
first half of the course studies select influential papers highlighting
characteristics of markets for financial futures, commodity contracts and
options and their valuation. After the 2008 Global Financial Crisis regulators
worldwide have been pushing for increasing role of central counterparty clearing
houses (CCPs) in clearing of over-the-counter derivatives. The second half of
the course studies the economics of derivatives clearing, and implications of
increasing role of CCPs for systemic risk. The was a one-off course offered in
2020.

**O10. Strategic Risk Management**: This MBA course was designed to introduce
issues in managing financial risks in a large non-financial corporation. The
focus was on strategic risks emanating from fluctuations in commodity prices,
foreign exchange rates and interest rates. This was the first course properly
case-based course I was involved in, and was responsible for getting me into
corporate finance. This course was offered every year from 2016 to 2019 with
[Jayanth R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}. This eventually
led to our related current offering, Strategic Corporate Finance.

**O9. Derivatives Pricing**: This PhD course was designed to provide an
introduction to the theory of derivatives pricing models in
continuous-time. Beginning with a review of relevant prerequisites, the course
first built the intuition of necessary concepts using discrete time models
before moving to derivatives pricing in continuous time using the Black-Scholes
model. The second-half of the course introduced select advanced topics including
models of jump-diffusion, fixed-income securities and stochastic volatility. The
course used a mix of readings from textbooks, review papers and select classic
papers from the field of derivatives pricing. This course was offered every year
from 2013 to 2019.

**O8. Foundations of Finance**: This is a compulsory course for PhD students in
Finance, and it introduces essentials of utility theory, financial economics and
mathematical preliminaries for asset pricing and corporate finance. The course
is divided into four parts. The first part covers microeconomics of asset
pricing and builds basics of expected utility theory and risk aversion. The
second part reviews main results from mathematics of vector spaces and random
variables. The third part covers portfolio theory, separation theorems and
static CAPM. The fourth and the final part introduces economics of information
asymmetry, signaling and agency theory to build foundations for corporate
finance. I taught this course in 2018 and 2019.

**O7. Structured Products**: This course was designed to introduce a variety of
structured products sold by market makers in equity, foreign exchange and fixed
income markets. Using real world term-sheets, the course discussed products
ranging from simple barrier options to complex structured notes. The focus was
be on the business logic behind popular structures, and issues involved in
designing and pricing such products. This course assumed a basic knowledge of
derivatives. This course was offered every year from 2016 to 2018 with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}.

**O6. Analytics of Financial Risk Management**: This MBA course was designed to
provide a brief introduction to the mathematical theory of risk measures and
their applications in financial risk management. In particular, the course
covered the following topics: i) idea of risk factors and loss distributions,
ii) standard methods for market risk measurement, iii) convex and coherent risk
measures, iv) extremal risk measures, and v) Bayesian approach to risk
management. This course was offered twice, in 2014 and 2015.

**O5. Monetary Theory and Policy**: This MBA course was designed to provide
students a framework to understand the debates surrounding the theory and
practice of monetary policy today.  After reviewing the IS/LM, AD/AS framework
introduced in MEP, the course starts off with the instrument problem facing a
central bank and goes on to consider the “rules vs. discretion” debate. Next we
look at the transmission channels through which monetary policy works and study
the usefulness of Taylor rules in practice.  After looking at the linkages of
monetary policy with the fixed-income market and the role of quantitative easing
in financial crisis, the course ends with a discussion of “inflation targeting”
as a framework for monetary policy. This course was jointly with [Errol
D'Souza](https://www.iima.ac.in/faculty-research/faculty-directory/errol-dsouza),
and I last taught this course in 2016.

**O4. Pricing and Hedging Derivative Securities**: This course was designed to
introduce methods for pricing derivative securities in practice. It builds up
the necessary toolkit for understanding pricing and hedging of equity/FX
derivatives using the Black-Scholes model. The course also introduces popular
plain vanilla and structured prod- ucts in the equity/FX markets, and discusses
practical difficulties associated with hedging using the Black-Scholes model.
While the course no doubt has a mathematical bent, for most of the concepts the
math required is limited to having a working knowledge of calculus, Taylor
series, and basic probability theory. The emphasis of this course is on
providing the toolkit and its applications. This was the first elective course I
designed and offered, so it remains special to me. I last taught this course in
2015.

**O3. Computational Finance**: This MBA course was designed to introduces
numerical methods for pricing derivative securities in practice. The focus of
the course was on the use of Monte Carlo and Finite Difference methods for
pricing equity and foreign exchange derivatives. The course ended with a
discussion of 'volatility smile' and the use of stochastic volatility models in
practice. This course was offered once in 2013 with [Jayanth
R. Varma](https://www.jrvarma.in/){:target="_blank"}. A version of this course
was also taught at [DAIICT, Gandhinagar](https://www.daiict.ac.in/) in 2016.

**O2. Time Series Analysis**: This PhD course was designed to introduce the
theory and methods of time series analysis for research in economics and
finance. The objective of the course was two-fold. First is to give participants
enough technical background to enable them to read research papers in applied
time series analysis. The second was to introduce select advanced topics useful
for analysis of macroeconomic and financial time series. After introducing
fundamental concepts in time series analysis, the course covers the theory of
stationary ARMA processes and reviews the relevant asymptotic distribution
theory.  This forms the bulk of roughly half the course and forms the basis for
studying Vector Autoregressions (VARs) which is discussed next. Moving on from
considering covariance stationary processes, the course next introduces the
econometrics of unit roots. The core of the remaining portion consists of
studying linear combinations of unit root processes, i.e. Cointegrated Systems
(VECMs), and models with conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH). We end the
course by introducing State Space representations of time series models and
Bayesian methods. This was the first PhD course I designed, and I offered alone
for a couple years and then with [Apratim
Guha](https://acad.xlri.ac.in/facprofile/index.php?682). I last taught this
course in 2014.

**O1. Macroeconomics and Economic Policy**: Why do some countries grow at a
faster rate than others? Why are there inflation, unemployment and recessions?
What are the sources of these aggregate economic fluctuations? Can the
government policymakers do something about them? Should they? This course
provides a framework to start thinking about these questions. It introduces
students to the definition and measurement of aggregate variables such as income
and expenditure, inflation and unemployment, and then develop a conceptual
framework that provides insights into the determinants of these aggregate
measures that macroeconomics concerns itself with. The course will also include
an analysis of the role of government and central bank with reference to
monetary, fiscal and foreign exchange rate policies. This is a core course in
our MBA programs, and I taught this course to PGPs in 2012 and 2013.

